Designer superlattices

Moiré materials have emerged as versatile platforms for exploring topological and strongly-correlated phases, with the notable recent discoveries of unconventional superconductivity and fractional Chern insulators. Such states emerge around flat electronic minibands where Coulomb interactions exceed the kinetic energy, based on the nanoscale modulation of hopping between vdW layers. These superlattice geometries are constrained, however, by the underlying atomic lattices, while strain and stacking disorder can also obscure the essential physics for global probes. Drawing inspiration from moiré systems, the QMM Lab is developing complementary methods for generating untwisted vdW superlattices, instead exploiting precision nanopatterning to generate gauge potentials with high geometric tunability and uniformity across large device areas. 

Graphene serves as a natural starting point, where electronic structure engineering has already been demonstrated in superlattices based on chemical modification, hole etching, electrostatic gating (see some exciting recent work in the Du Lab and Cano Group), and strain. Thus far, however, only periodically gated and strained graphene have displayed signatures of electronic correlations within the flat minibands. Under strain, the spatial modulation of hopping is represented by a gauge field that behaves just like an electromagnetic vector potential and yields massive pseudo-magnetic fields (hundreds of Tesla!) that can exceed the real fields available even in pulsed magnet facilities. Extremely flat topological minibands and emergent anomalous Hall phases have indeed been anticipated theoretically for some time in strained graphene by analogy with the perfectly flat Landau levels of a 2D electron gas in a real magnetic field, yet fabrication challenges have limited experimental advances. To overcome this, we have recently refined a high-resolution electron beam lithography process with spin-on glass, whereby nearly arbitrary height profiles can be patterned onto standard SiO$_2$/Si device substrates with resolution down to the sub-20 nm scale of magic angle moiré superlattices. These specialized substrates offer both designer strain fields and periodic back-gates for overlaid 2D material stacks, including a conformal top gate for tuning chemical potential. 

Continuum model calculations reveal highly modified electronic structure for hexagonal nano-strained superlattices, including flat minibands. To gap the system, isolate topological minibands, and thus prepare a nearly ideal setting for the emergence of quantum anomalous Hall and various correlated states, we further deform the nanodots into triangles. Crucially, while the inversion symmetry breaking leads to inequivalent spatial distributions of A and B sublattice polarization (with pseudo-magnetic fields polarizing this pseudo-spin degree of freedom), a matching scalar potential built into the periodic capacitance of our device geometry is needed to split these energies, induce a mass gap, and allow spontaneous valley polarization to break time reversal. Beyond triangular lattices, more exotic geometries such as frustrated kagome and Lieb lattices have flat bands encoded in their underlying tight binding descriptions, with the breathing kagome exhibiting a ladder of extremely flat and isolated minibands. 

Image: Continuum tight-binding calculations of graphene strained on nanotriangular pillars (ideal and real height profiles shown), yielding flat and topological minibands.


Home snippet: High-precision superlattice engineering on the scale of electron coherence, toward designer correlated and topological phases.