Nano-acoustic symmetry engineering

We are developing methods to nanostructure thin quantum materials, including films and flakes, and to excite acoustic structural modes of selected symmetries using ultrafast light pulses. Although such modes are well established in plasmonic metals, their implications for quantum materials and their ability to perturb intrinsic lattice symmetry remain largely unexplored. Because the symmetry of the nanostructure is imparted on the atomic lattice by the nano-acoustic strain field, this approach provides a versatile and deterministic route for exploring quantum-material phase diagrams, extending both static strain tuning and ultrafast nonlinear phononics. It enables dynamic breaking of lattice inversion symmetry through directional ($C_1$) or triangular ($C_3$) structural motifs, for example, which may provide access to topological phase transitions as well as chiral and multiferroic orders that otherwise remain deeply hidden to other ultrafast or static probes. We have already established the ability to pattern a wide range of thin films into well-defined nanostructures and have observed nano-acoustic modes in a quantum material for the first time, to our knowledge, specifically in the 2D ferromagnetic metal Fe$_3$GeTe$_2$. We are presently working to understand the implications for intrinsic material symmetries through techniques such as time-resolved second harmonic generation. Exploring the new class of nanostructured quantum matter is a timely and important problem, with the potential to advance the broader goal of materials by design and enable access to new magnetic, topological, and strongly correlated phases. 

Image: Illustration of a nano-triangular acoustic mode distorting an underlying square lattice with transient directionality oscillating on hundreds-of-picosecond timescales (top). The local directionality is further controlled by the structure orientation (bottom).


Home snippet: Dynamically tuning atomic lattice symmetry via acoustic vibrational modes of the nanoscale structure.