Vectorial nanocurrents

Currents of all kinds result from broken symmetries, in space or in time. Charge currents that arise in the presence of applied electric fields (which define a specific flow direction) serve as the basis for most modern technologies and powerful scientific probes of material properties. Ultrafast light pulses can also drive photocurrents in materials on timescales several orders of magnitude faster applied voltages, yet these rely either on intrinsically broken symmetries of the material lattice or extrinsic symmetry breaking at interfaces, since electromagnetic light fields oscillate back and forth rapidly with zero net directionality. Several methods have emerged recently that exploit nonlinearity to controllably drive currents in symmetric materials, yet these rely on phase-sensitive setups that are difficult to spatially pattern or scale up. So how can we proceed?

A remarkably simple and versatile option turns out to be: Pattern extrinsic structure with the desired symmetry directly onto or into the material. With symmetry-broken plasmonic (e.g., gold) metasurfaces on otherwise centrosymmetric graphene, for instance, we can drive strong nanoscale charge flow with directional structures. Furthermore, the light-matter interaction can define an arbitrary directionality with triangular structures that are inversion-broken but not inherently directional. This leads to broad capabilities for patterning and dynamically controlling ultrafast, nanoscale charge flow in many different materials.

Recently, we have demonstrated that symmetry-engineered nanocurrents can be used as a new space-, time-, and angle-resolved photocurrent probe of material properties. In simple device geometries they directly reveal the intrinsic equipotential and electric field lines of the device, while in the presence of spatial inhomogeneity they can be used to map domain structure due to deviations in these flow lines and the magnitude of the local response. Another application that emerges is structured terahertz light, and we have discovered that optically tunable compressive (radial) and circulating (azimuthal) photocurrents emit special light pulses that carry nontrivial topology (see 'Topological light'). Other possibilities for optoelectronic signal transduction and adaptive interconnects in classical and quantum information systems are presently under investigation.
 
Image: Triangular nanostructures yielding current flow that can be driven in any direction, simply by rotating the linear polarization of the incident optical excitation laser. Results shown for gold nanotriangles (800 nm resonance) and tri-petal structures (1550 nm resonance) on graphene, serving as the basis for much broader applications in a variety of material platforms.


Home snippet: Symmetry-broken metasurfaces define local the directionality of local ultrafast responses.